# Platypus: Quick, Cheap, and Powerful Refinement of LLMs

The Platypus models are a series of fine-tuned and merged variants based on the LLaMA and LLaMa-2 transformer architectures. Platypus takes advantage of [LoRA](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.09685.pdf) and [PEFT](https://github.com/huggingface/peft). 

All base models are available via HuggingFace: [`garage-bAInd`](https://huggingface.co/garage-bAInd)

This Technique was used to fine tune [Llama-2-13b](https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-2-13b-hf) with 1k data entries, for our problem statement. For dataset and generation techniques, refer the data folder.
## Methodology
Our methodology revolves around the development of Platypus, a family of fine-tuned and merged Large Language Models (LLMs) that has achieved the top position on HuggingFace’s Open LLM Leaderboard. The core components of our approach include:

1. Curating Open-Platypus
We created a curated dataset, Open-Platypus, by combining 11 open-source datasets, mainly focused on STEM and logic knowledge.
Open-Platypus employs the Alpaca instruction-tuning format, with a structured approach to each question, including an instruction, input, and output.
The dataset emphasizes human-designed questions, with only around 10\% generated by a Large Language Model (LLM), enabling robust performance with minimal fine-tuning data.

2. Removing Similar & Duplicate Questions
To mitigate memorization risks, we implemented a de-duplication process, eliminating exact duplicates and questions with high cosine similarity.
Priority was given to retaining questions with more verbose answers to enhance the depth of explanations and step-by-step solutions.

3. Contamination Check
To address potential test data leaks, we developed heuristics for identifying contamination risks, categorizing questions as duplicate, gray-area, or similar but different.
Questions falling into these categories were cautiously removed from the training set to prevent inadvertent memorization of test data.

4. Fine-tuning & Merging
Our methodology employs Low Rank Approximation (LoRA) for training efficiency, involving freezing pre-trained model weights and incorporating rank decomposition matrices.
State-of-the-art Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) is utilized for model merging, taking advantage of the PEFT library's built-in capabilities.
Fine-tuning initially focused on attention modules and expanded to other modules based on performance analysis.
Hyperparameters were carefully chosen, and Alpaca's prompt formatting template ensured consistency.
The fine-tuning process utilized the Hugging Face transformers library for compatibility and efficiency.

## Local Setup

This repository is multi-GPU friendly, and provides code to use model or data parellelism, depending on your computational resources. 

1. Install dependencies

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

2. Be sure to use these exact requirements or you may run into model saving or OOM issues.

## Fine-tuning (`finetune.py`)

Run `fine-tuning.sh`.

Note: The script above uses `torchrun` for data parallelism. PyTorch is not in `requirements.txt` since technically you can run fine-tuning without it (after a few minor changes to the .py file). To use `fine-tuning.sh`, [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/) needs to be installed. `torchrun` is recommended for parallelisation of training, but `accelerate` can also be used. 

Hyperparameters used to fine-tune Platypus:

| Hyperparameter      | Values |
|---------------------|--------|
| learning rate       | 4e-4   |
| batch size          | 16     |
| microbatch  size    | 1      |
| warmup steps        | 100    |
| epochs              | 1,5      |
| weight decay        | 0.     |
| lr scheduler        | cosine |
| lora alpha          | 16     |
| lora rank           | 16     |
| lora dropout        | 0.05   |
| lora target modules | gate_proj, up_proj, down_proj|
| cutoff length       | 4096   |
| train on inputs     | False  |
| group by length     | False  |
| add eos token       | False  |

Hardware Specifications for training - 

| Specification      | Values |
|---------------------|--------|
| GPU               | A6000 (48 GB VRAM)  |
| Number of GPUs    | 4 |
| RAM               | 180 GB | 
| Time taken for training | 1 hour |
| Model size after training | 49 GB |

## Merging

Once fine-tuning is complete, `merge.sh` is used to merge the LoRA weights back into the base LLaMa model for export to HuggingFace format.

**NOTE:** (peft should always be installed from source).

# CLI 

[Fastchat](https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat) provides a simple setup for those interested in running the model. After downloading the model through HuggingFace, clone the Fastchat repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat.git
cd FastChat
```

Download the required packages:

```
pip3 install --upgrade pip  # enable PEP 660 support
pip3 install -e .
```

Finally, run the following:

```
python3 -m fastchat.serve.cli --model-path garage-bAInd/Platypus-30B --conv-template alpaca

```
## Analysis
The analysis of Platypus models' performance provides valuable insights into their effectiveness and competitive positioning:

1. Leaderboard Performance
Platypus models, particularly the Platypus2-70B-instruct variant, secured the top position on the Hugging Face Open LLM Leaderboard with a remarkable average score of 73.13.

2. Dataset Quality and Training Efficiency
Open-Platypus, the curated dataset, played a pivotal role in achieving strong performance metrics with minimal fine-tuning data and computational resources.
The fine-tuning process, coupled with the strategic use of LoRA and model merging, demonstrated efficiency in training time and resource utilization.

3. Model Versatility and Generalization
Platypus models showcased versatility by outperforming other state-of-the-art fine-tuned LLMs across various model sizes.
The models' ability to handle STEM and logic tasks effectively positions them as generalist tools, with the potential for further improvements in the field.

4. Contributions to the Field
Platypus contributes to the ongoing advancements in Large Language Models by optimizing training time, computational resources, and model performance.
The combination of a specialized dataset, innovative fine-tuning techniques, and strategic model merging positions Platypus at the forefront of LLM development.

## Sample Results

### Instruction: Search for objects related to the customer CustomerABC and create action items from the search results.
### Response: [
  {
    "tool_name": "search",
    "arguments": [
      {
        "argument_name": "customer",
        "argument_value": "CustomerABC"
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    "tool_name": "action_item",
    "arguments": [
      {
        "argument_name": "objects",
        "argument_value": "$$PREV[0]"
      }
    ]
  }
]
### Instruction: Find all work items in the testing stage that are related to parts PART-1 and PART-2 and summarize them.
### Response: [
  {
    "tool_name": "search",
    "arguments": [
      {
        "argument_name": "stage",
        "argument_value": "testing"
      },
      {
        "argument_name": "related_to",
        "argument_value": "$$PREV[0]"
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    "tool_name": "summarize",
    "arguments": [
      {
        "argument_name": "objects",
        "argument_value": "$$PREV[1]"
      }
    ]
  }
]
